So we're going
to start building a custom action here
and we're going to start with composite actions
simply because that's the simplest kind of action
to get started with but just to be clear,
this does not mean that it's a useless kind of action.
Instead, the opposite is the case.
This is a very useful kind of action
for simplifying your workflows
and reusing repeated logic and steps.
And if we take a look at this example workflow
in this example project,
there are some steps
which are repeated in a lot of jobs there.
For example, the step for checking out the code,
foe then caching the dependencies
or restoring the cached dependencies
and for installing the dependencies
if they were not cached.
These steps, these three steps
are repeated in three jobs of this workflow.
And if you have something like this,
that's always a great use case
for building a custom composite action.
Of course, you don't have
to build a custom composite action.
You can simply copy and paste the code
and repeat the configuration code here
but you could also build a custom action
and that's what we will do here.
Now, when it comes to building custom actions,
you have a couple of choices.
You can create a brand new project
and a brand new repository,
a brand new GitHub repository for your action
and then if it's a public repository,
that could be used by any other workflow
in any other repository as an action.
So your actions can live in their own repositories
and then you could use them straight from there.
But you can also add actions
to projects you already have
so that they're then only available in those projects.
And that's what I'll do here.
In this existing project,
under .github next to the workflows folder,
I'll add an actions folder,
though this name is up to you.
It doesn't have to be actions.
But it is, of course, a common choice
since it makes a lot of sense.
Now, in there, in that folder,
I'm going to create the actions
that will then only be usable by this project.
So by workflows that are part of this project,
not by any other workflows.
If you wanna create actions that are available
to different workflows in different repositories,
you must create them as standalone repositories.
Those actions must be standalone repositories
if you want that.
So here I'm going
to create a locally available action instead
and in this actions folder,
I'm going to create another subfolder,
which I'm going to name cached-deps
for cached dependencies
because my goal is to outsource the step
for caching the dependencies
and for installing the dependencies
into a separate action.
Not the code for checking out the repository code
because since my action will only be part
of that repository here,
I must get the code of the repository
before I will be able to use my locally defined action.
If my action would be defined
as a standalone public repository,
then I could move the checkout code
into that separate action
because I could then reference the action
via the repository URL.
But since the definition for my action
will be part of this project,
the checkout code can't be part of the action itself
because we must check out the project code
before we can use the action defined
in the project code, and in the project files.
That hopefully makes sense.
That's why I'm just moving the caching
and the dependency installation step into my custom action.
But speaking of that custom action here,
how can a custom action be created now
in that folder which we created here?
Well, no matter which kind of action you're creating,
if it's a composite action,
a JavaScript or a Docker action,
you always must add a action.yml file.
So a file that contains the configuration
and definition of that action.
This file must be part of any action you create.
It also must be part of any repository
that holds an action you might create.
So here in this file,
we now configure this action.
And for this composite action,
this also is the only file we need.
For JavaScript and Docker, we'll need more files
as you will learn later,
but for a composite action, this is the only file,
and in this action.yml file,
we start by giving our action a name.
For example Get Dependencies
or maybe Get & Cache Dependencies is a better name.
So that's similar to the workflow definition file
where we also specify the name.
However here, we specify a name
but now we don't specify an on key.
That does not exist for custom actions
because actions are not workflows,
instead they are used as part of workflows.
Therefore, they don't need a trigger.
Instead they will be included
in workflow definition files later.
Hence the next key we add here instead
is a description where we could say get the dependencies
and cache them.
Maybe we also add some clarification
that we'll use npm for getting the dependencies.
This description is important
because if we would publish an action to the marketplace,
it's essentially the description
that's showing up here,
the title that shows up here,
the name of the action and then the description below it.
So therefore now we have that name and that description.
Next, for the composite action, we add the runs key.
So not steps or anything like that
but instead runs.
And runs then needs a nested key called using,
which must be set to composite here.
So this must be composite.
Make sure you don't have a typo in there
and this also must be using and this must be runs.
Up to this point, you have no choices regarding that.
And this will tell GitHub Actions
that this is a custom composite action.
Now as a next step,
no pun intended, we add the steps key here.
So now we have steps here
and now nested below that,
we define steps basically as we also defined them here
in our workflow definition file.
Though I will highlight
that it's the official syntax documentation
for custom actions that should be visited
to learn all about the different fields that are supported
for these steps.
Here you can learn all about the fields
that can be added to the individual steps
but in general, this is similar
to what you learned about steps and workflows.
So therefore, what I can actually do here
is I can grab these cached dependencies
and the installed dependencies steps from my workflow,
and simply paste this here below steps
in my custom action.
Just make sure you don't mess up the indentation.
It should be indented like this.
So now I add these two steps as steps to this custom action,
and I can keep all the keys I was using in those steps
because they're still supported.
That's especially also true for the if key here
where I can still run this step conditionally
only if we had no cache hit here.
Now, one special key that must be added
if you're using the run key though
is the shell key where you choose which shell
should be used for executing the step.
And here I wanna use bash as a shell.
So that's an extra setting you must add here
when creating a custom composite action
and you're using the run key.
When using another action, as I'm doing it here,
you don't have to add the shell key.
And that's, by the way, also important.
You can use other actions in your own actions.
That is absolutely fine and totally normal.
So with that, we added these two steps here
and with that, we built our first action.
Now we can use that action in our workflow.